# Less Wrong Corrupted; or, Comment on "Banning Said Achmiz"

## I. Prologue

### "If I Can't Explain It to Said Achmiz, I Probably Don't Understand It"

This is a tribute to my friend Said Achmiz, the wisest person I know.

The choice of adjective is deliberately chosen as term of art. Achmiz is not the most quick-witted, nor the most knowledgable, nor the most creative, nor the most savvy. I say _wise_ because the nature of his peculiar talent is the same one [ascribed to Socrates](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/JcgtKunqmELefxksx/killing-socrates): [_he knows what he doesn't know_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_know_that_I_know_nothing).

Most people don't. At least, I don't. All too often, when asked, "Do you get what I'm saying?", I reply, "I think so," with perfect sincerity, only realizing later that I was lying—that I could not have paraphrased my interlocutor's ideas, let alone explained where I agreed or disagreed with them. In retrospect (and only in retrospect), it's clear that I didn't want to disrupt the harmonious give-and-take flow of social exchange, that I feared being seen as foolish or obstinate for having the temerity to say, "No, I don't understand"—and to continue standing by that _No_ should understanding not be forthcoming.

The unique genius of Achmiz is simply that he's not afraid to be seen as foolish or obstinate. If he doesn't understand how you're using a term, he'll ask for a definition. If he doesn't see how to apply your abstract claim, he'll ask for an example. If your offered definition or example doesn't make sense to him, he'll say so. _Bluffing doesn't work on him._

Occasionally it strikes me as a little odd when Said asks about some detail that I think he should have been able to fill in by himself, but it's no trouble: if I can spare the time (and it's worth it, for him), I'm usually happy to type up the requested additional explanation. And if I can spare the time but can't come up with an explanation that will satisfy him, that's an alarming warning sign that my grasp of the topic wasn't as firm as thought: I didn't know what I didn't know.

A few years ago, I was disappointed when the conclusion of a post that I had labored over for months didn't land in the comment section the way I wanted it to: what my words had meant in my head, wasn't the same as what the commenters took them to mean.

To help me figure out how revise it, I emailed Said, explaining what I meant. He had some criticisms. I proposed a rewrite. He said the rewrite was still confusing. I wrote some additional explanation, particularly of an analogy in the passage in question which I was quite fond of. Said was unmoved and pointed out some relevant disanalogies. I cut the analogy from the rewrite entirely, which met with Said's tentative approval.

The revised passage is less engaging writing than the original. (It was a really clever analogy.) But it's _clear_, and for that I have Said to thank—not just for his generosity with his time, but for his steadfastness. A lot of people in that situation wouldn't have stuck to their position over such a long back-and-forth (and back-and-forth-and-back-and-forth): their acute social perception would have noticed that I was fond of the analogy and "mercifully" told me what I wanted to hear—at the cost of making the post worse.[^de-cleyre-epigraph] In contrast, Said, no less socially perceptive, has the strength of will to not make sociality his master. The plea of a friend and the threat of an enemy are equally ineffective at budging him from calling it as he sees it (and a true friend wouldn't ask him to lie to them).

[^de-cleyre-epigraph]: A similar process played out again during the construction of the present post. The original title of the post was to be "Said Achmiz in His Felon Stripes Stands Far Above You Now", from an adaptation of [Voltairine de Cleyre's impassioned 1890 defense of the jailed proto-feminist publisher Moses Harman](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/voltairine-de-cleyre-sex-slavery) that I wanted to use in the post:

    > If, beyond these, there are those here tonight who have ever forced intellectual deference from a peer, those who have prostituted themselves in the name of Charity, those who have brought confused, immoral, or unexamined arguments to the light, without the means of defense for them, and yet will go from this post and say, "Said Achmiz is an unclean man—a man rewarded by just punishment," then to _you_ I say, and may the words ring deep within your ears _until you die_: go on! Drive your sheep to the shambles! Crush that old, uncouth man beneath your Juggernaut! In the name of Niceness, Community, and Civilization, do it! In the name of the Chicagoan who preached the twelve virtues, do it! In the name of Clear Thinking, Clear Communication, and Collaborative Truthseeking, do it!
    >
    > [...]
    >
    > Would you smile to see him dead? Would you say, "We are rid of this obscenist"? Fools! The corpse would laugh at you from its cold eyelids! The motionless lips would mock, and the solemn hands, the pulseless, folded hands, in their quietness would write the last indictment, which neither Time nor you can efface. Kill him! And you write his glory and your shame! Said Achmiz in his felon stripes stands far above you now, and Said Achmiz _dead_ will live on, immortal in the race he died to free! Kill him!

    At first it was going to be an epigraph—to the last section, if I couldn't get away with making it an epigraph to the whole post without getting dismissed by an unsympathetic audience. Said thought it was "too overwrought" and that it remained to be seen if a later draft might "earn it." I couldn't bear to cut it and ended up using it as a peroration in a later draft. Said didn't buy it, saying that his "previous comments about the tone stand" and that it "muddle[d] the concluding section." He was right.


I've been blessed with many friends and collaborators in this life, each with their own unique skillset. Some of them are prolifically generative, gushing with a dozen theories and metaphors and frames at the slightest prompt. Some of them know extremely advanced mathematics and can prove in minutes what would take me hours just to understand the theorem statement. Some of them are kind and empathetic, ready to lend a sympathetic ear to anyone when the world's cruelties seem too much to bear.

Said is none of these things. But when what I need is a critic's discrimination—when I'm worried that I might be fooling myself via lack of rigor—I can't think of anyone I'd rather have by my side. If I can't explain it to Said Achmiz, I probably don't understand it.

## II. The Ban Contradicts Less Wrong's Stated Values

### An Inversion of Values

_Less Wrong_ chief moderator Oliver Habryka begins what I can only describe as [an astonishing document](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation) by contrasting two frequently voiced perspectives on the culture of _Less Wrong_.

On the one hand, it is said that "LessWrong is a place that really forces you to get your arguments together", that its straight-shooting culture is "one of the things that makes it one of the most valuable forums on the internet."

On the other hand, it is said that using the website "seems really unrewarding" because:

> You show up, you put a ton of effort into a post, and at the end the comment section will tear apart some random thing that isn't load bearing for your argument, isn't something you consider particularly important, and whose discussion doesn't illuminate what you are trying to communicate, all the while implying that they are superior in their dismissal of your irrational and dumb ideas.

Habryka opines that "both of these perspectives are right."

I would go further. It's not just that both of these perspectives are right. It's that you can't have one without the other. By what means can a web forum "really force you to get your arguments together"?

There is only one means: by commenters pointing out all the places where a post says something wrong—anything wrong. If the error wasn't "load bearing for your argument", it's still worth pointing out in the comment section, for the benefit of readers who might otherwise be deceived. (We're not going to run out of _paper_.) It doesn't matter if it "isn't something you consider particularly important." (If it's so unimportant that you don't even want to receive corrections, then what was it doing in the post?)

If the "discussion doesn't illuminate what you are trying to communicate", it's worth asking: why is that? If it were because the commenters were for some perverse reason pretending _en masse_ to not understand your clear and correct explanations, then that would be bad. But if it's because your explanations are not, in fact, clear and correct, then disappointment was inevitable: commenters can't illuminate what you're trying to communicate if you didn't successfully communicate it.

As a perennial _Less Wrong_ author of over 100 posts—[including](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/8cWMX6L8St8k9pPRC/comment-on-endogenous-epistemic-factionalization) [some](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/K2Ae2vmAKwhiwKEo5/terrified-comments-on-corrigibility-in-claude-s-constitution) [nine](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/mB95aqTSJLNR9YyjH/message-length) [Curated](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/sGEJi9wFT3Gdqg2nM/the-standard-analogy) [posts](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/MN4NRkMw7ggt9587K/firming-up-not-lying-around-its-edge-cases-is-less-broadly), including four voted Best of _Less Wrong_ in [2019 (#9)](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/DoPo4PDjgSySquHX8/heads-i-win-tails-never-heard-of-her-or-selective-reporting), [2021 (#31)](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/dYspinGtiba5oDCcv/feature-selection), [2023 (#14)](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/pYWA7hYJmXnuyby33/alignment-implications-of-llm-successes-a-debate-in-one-act), and [2024 (#33)](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/8yCXeafJo67tYe5L4/and-all-the-shoggoths-merely-players)—I have the experience to testify on this matter. Yes, it is disappointing when a post doesn't land in the comment section the way I wanted it to, but it's obviously not because commenters are culpably witholding their illumination of my precious ideas. It's because writing about ideas is hard and I don't always get it right. Sometimes I'm wrong, sometimes I'm confused, sometimes I don't write clearly—[and](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/XbXJZjwinkoQXu4db/funk-tunul-s-legacy-or-the-legend-of-the-extortion-war) [it](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/67NrgoFKCWmnG3afd/you-ll-never-persuade-people-like-that) [shows](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/rzFrwWvvpgzfnwSeB/some-basic-level-of-mutual-respect-about-whether-other) in the comment section and the karma score. I certainly prefer it when the discussion illuminates what I was trying to communicate, but the only real way to accomplish that is by me writing something that commenters as individuals find illuminating—and there's always the possibility of that not happening when people are being honest, rather than colluding to flatter the author's ego. ["Yes, and—" requires the possibility of "No, because—"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Pwg7nmjkx8mxmE6gF/yes-and-requires-the-possibility-of-no-because).

(As for "implying that they are superior in their dismissal of your irrational and dumb ideas", I suppose it's true that when someone rejects an idea, that [creates a logical implication that the rejecter thinks they're more rational than the idea-proposer on that topic](https://www.overcomingbias.com/p/disagreement-ishtml). It's a weirdly petty implication to focus on, though. Who cares?)

What is most striking about the second perspective's list of reasons that critical commenters make _Less Wrong_ unrewarding to interact with is what it does _not_ say.

_It doesn't say the commenters are wrong!_ If the second perspective had claimed that commenters _mischaracterize_ posts (rather than merely criticizing non-"load bearing" aspects of the posts or failing to "illuminate what [authors] are trying to communicate"), that would be a serious problem that would warrant corrective actions by moderators. We can infer that bad arguments and strawmanning are not seen by user reports as a pervasive problem on _Less Wrong_. [(If they were, the second perspective would have mentioned it.)](https://www.readthesequences.com/Absence-Of-Evidence-Is-Evidence-Of-Absence)

Thus, it would seem that the two complementary perspectives described by Habryka are describing a success story of a vibrant intellectual forum with a culture of excellence that cares fanatically about getting things right via the power of vigorous and rigorous discussion. It's true that posting on _Less Wrong_ can be "unrewarding"—but that's because the rewards are real and therefore have to be earned.

Habryka states that "few people have done as much to shape the culture of LessWrong" than Said Achmiz, and in the comments [guesses that a survey would place Achmiz around #20 on a list of such figures (and that "this would be an underestimate of [Achmiz's] effect on the culture")](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=Jmo9yeEkYpQMDSDrd).

At this point, readers who missed the title of Habryka's post might be under the impression that Achmiz is being honored with some kind of award. (Why else would Habryka be writing a post describing what's good about the website's culture, and then naming Achmiz as a cornerstone of that culture? What else would the post be announcing?)

Upon realizing that the post is announcing a _ban_ of Achmiz, the reader is at a loss at how to react: the decision would seem to represent a complete inversion of the stated values that purportedly justify it. The fact that Habryka has written a 9000-word post explaining his reasoning offers hope that some clarification will be provided, but upon reading it, the mystery only deepens. It's hard to even know where to begin. The intimidating task of dissecting the post's errors and omissions is one that would rightly demand the talents of a discriminating critic of the highest order, someone like ...

Well, I guess that's my job now.


### If "Every Individual Owns Their Own Judgment of You", Then the Ban Rationale Is Untenable

Habryka goes on to articulate two alleged failure modes of online communities. In the sneer attractor, people tear others down with nonspecific criticism; in the LinkedIn attractor, people build each other up with nonspecific praise. Habryka goes on to say that many users see Achmiz as serving a vital function of preventing _Less Wrong_ from falling into the LinkedIn attractor. He identifies Achmiz as the "bearer of a flag" which is worth quoting in full (bold in original):

> "Just because you are hurt by, and anxious about others criticizing you or your ideas, doesn't mean we are going to accommodate you. It is the responsibility of your audience to determine what they think of you and your contributions.
>
> **You do not own your reputation. Every individual owns their own judgment of you.**
>
> You can shape it by doing good or bad things, but you do not get to shape it by preventing me and others from openly discussing you and your contributions."

Well spoken! Habryka reports that he "really care[s] about this flag too" and that "much of the decisions [he has] made around LessWrong have been to foster a culture that understands and rallies behind this flag." He expresses hope that his acknowledgement of the risks of LinkedIn-like sycophancy will give supporters of the culture of excellence "a bit more trust that [he is] tracking some things they care about."

However, it is difficult to reconcile this claim with the remainder of the post, which persistently construes intellectually substantive criticism as "punishments" or as claims to have "violated some social norm", and ultimately announces a ban of Achmiz on the grounds that the judgements Achmiz expresses have deleterious social effects (bringing the site closer to the alleged sneer attractor).[^sneer-attractor] The entire point of the post is to announce that the moderators are preventing Achmiz from openly discussing _Less Wrong_ authors and their contributions!

[^sneer-attractor]: Although curiously, Habryka's detailed description of the sneer attractor doesn't particularly seem to resemble Achmiz's comments in any aspect other than them both involving harsh criticism. Habryka writes that "[t]he key component of making good sneer club criticism is to never actually say out loud what your problem is." But Achmiz is quite willing to say out loud what his problem is, and is clearly committed to answering clarifying questions at length if his initial complaint was unclear.

After a discussion of Achmiz's alleged commenting patterns (which I discuss in the next section), Habryka speculates that users will "ultimately give up feeling dejected and like a lot of people on LessWrong hate you." Setting aside the obvious irrationality of this inference—there's no good reason to think that one user's persistent questioning of your ideas implies that "a lot" of people "hate" you—it's hard to see the relevance given Habryka's supposed fostering of a culture that understands and rallies behind the aforementioned flag. Habryka just told us 900 words earlier that just because you're anxious about others criticizing you or your ideas doesn't mean the website is going to accomodate you! Anyone can scroll up and read it. And yet when people are hurt by and anxious about Said Achmiz in particular criticizing their ideas, the response is to ban Achmiz? The disconnect is glaring.

### The Ban Reneges on LessWrong 2.0's Single Locus of Discussion Mandate and Archipelago Doctrine

In the ban announcement, Habryka writes that "the foundation of why [he] feel[s] comfortable governing LessWrong with relatively few checks and balances" is because people have the option of just not using the site: "[t]here are many other places on the internet to read interesting ideas, to discuss with others, to participate in a community," he writes.

In contrast, in September 2017, Habryka's ["LW 2.0 Strategic Overview"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/rEHLk9nC5TtrNoAKT/lw-2-0-strategic-overview) cited Anna Salamon's ["On the Importance of Less Wrong, or Another Single Conversational Locus"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/8rYxw9xZfwy86jkpG/on-the-importance-of-less-wrong-or-another-single) as something "very important to [him]." Habryka quotes Salamon (bolding mine):

> 4. One feature that is pretty helpful here, is if we somehow maintain a single "conversation", rather than a bunch of people separately having thoughts and sometimes taking inspiration from one another. By "a conversation", I mean a space where people can e.g. reply to one another; rely on shared jargon/shorthand/concepts; build on arguments that have been established in common as probably-valid; **point out apparent errors and then have that pointing-out be actually taken into account or else replied-to**).
>
> 5. One feature that really helps things be "a conversation" in this way, is if there is a single Schelling set of posts/etc. that people (in the relevant community/conversation) are supposed to read, and can be assumed to have read.  Less Wrong used to be a such place; right now there is no such place; it seems to me highly desirable to form a new such place if we can.
>
> 6. We have lately ceased to have a "single conversation" in this way.  Good content is still being produced across these communities, but there is no single locus of conversation, such that if you're in a gathering of e.g. five aspiring rationalists, you can take for granted that of course everyone has read posts such-and-such. There is no one place you can post to, where, if enough people upvote your writing, people will reliably read and respond (rather than ignore), **and where others will call them out if they later post reasoning that ignores your evidence.** Without such a locus, it is hard for conversation to build in the correct way. (And hard for it to turn into arguments and replies, rather than a series of non sequiturs.)

That is, in Salamon's telling, apparently endorsed by Habryka in 2017, the reason to reboot _Less Wrong_ was not just to be _a_ place on the internet to read interesting ideas, discuss with others, or participate in a community, but specifically to reverse the "diaspora" that occurred when the original implementation of the site [fell into disrepair](https://www.reddit.com/r/slatestarcodex/comments/6tt3gy/a_history_of_the_rationality_community/dloghua/)—to be _the_ place to read interesting ideas building off the legacy of [the Sequences](https://www.readthesequences.com/).

Reversing a diaspora only works if the diverse elements of the diaspora are allowed to participate in the repatriation. For example, the State of Israel's legitimacy as a homeland for the Jewish people depends on its including all Jews as the concept has been historically and publicly understood. If a faction of [Ashkenazi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashkenazi_Jews) Jews seized power and arbitrarily decided that [Sephardic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sephardic_Jews) Jews can't be Israeli, that would seriously undermine the foundations of why many people supported the Zionist project in the first place.[^zionism]

[^zionism]: The Zionism analogy for re-centralizing a dispersed community writes itself given the term "_Less Wrong_ diaspora"; no particular geopolitical implications are intended.

Said Achmiz and his collaborators (such as the present author) are undisputedly part of the rationalist tradition. In 2023, _Less Wrong_ moderator Ben Pace [wrote](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9DhneE5BRGaCS2Cja/moderation-notes-re-recent-said-duncan-threads?commentId=mLJCumgJqJwFMruKx), and moderator Raymond Arnold [concurred](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9DhneE5BRGaCS2Cja/moderation-notes-re-recent-said-duncan-threads?commentId=uffyAbystKYkei9GJ), that "Said is the person independent of MIRI (including Vaniver) and Lightcone who contributes the most counterfactual bits to the sequences and LW still being alive in the world." In 2023, Arnold [told me](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9DhneE5BRGaCS2Cja/moderation-notes-re-recent-said-duncan-threads?commentId=Zd6sPyumY6Di4Qicz) that "there's an important spirit of early LessWrong that [I] keep alive[.]" In fact, we were here first: as far as I can tell, Achmiz and I were part of the community before any of the current moderators.[^tenure]

[^tenure]: My first comment—while the original Sequences were being written on _Overcoming Bias_, more than a year before _Less Wrong_ was founded—[dates to December 2007](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/etBrzxdfNop3DqJvA/guardians-of-the-truth?commentId=MPCaD7WZp4rrT2JAD); I [attended](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/i47JiJwNQ2q7bWf4L/ob-meetup-millbrae-thu-21-feb-7pm?commentId=bPQtJ4AdpPcJDQ2m9) the first _Overcoming Bias_ meetup in February 2008. Achmiz's first comment [dates to May 2010](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/kjArXFinD3deRZNRu/blue-and-yellow-tinted-choices?commentId=NPdBntED7Yvdc9dGX).

    In contrast, Pace ["read The Sequences [...] in 2011"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/aG74jJkiPccqdkK3c/the-lesswrong-team#Ben_Pace___Benito), Arnold's account [dates to September 2010](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/fyQZr4K8kAymubv3P/less-wrong-open-thread-september-2010?commentId=zhtvQMwTHXgfGEctT), Ruby Bloom ["found LessWrong in 2012"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/aG74jJkiPccqdkK3c/the-lesswrong-team), Ronny Fernandez's account [dates to 2011](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/a7n8GdKiAZRX86T5A/making-beliefs-pay-rent-in-anticipated-experiences?commentId=DGfsdDd86BL9LYtPt), Vaniver's account dates to [October 2010](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/hSeqgnc5CBJ643x9k/luminosity-twilight-fanfic-discussion-thread?commentId=ihKEMu48ZNSqJwuTS) after he ["found [_Less Wrong_] through a link to HPMOR on the xkcd forums"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/aG74jJkiPccqdkK3c/the-lesswrong-team#Matthew_Graves___Vaniver), and Habryka's account [dates to 2015](https://www.greaterwrong.com/users/habryka4?sort=old) with Vaniver confirming that Achmiz has ["been here longer"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=qpetELsqD4oCujfgG) than Habryka.

The relevance of seniority is that, insofar as Habryka agrees that _Less Wrong_ is ["less straightforwardly [his] personal fiefdom" because he "inherited what [he] consider[s] a really important cultural institution,"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=uyobAZy5iYAAWzSSi) one would expect him to agree that we're rationalists just as much as he is—that the cultural institution he's inherited stewardship over was supposed to serve us just as much as people who dislike our writing styles, much as Israel is supposed to be a home for all Jews, even if some Ashkenazi find Sephardic accents annoying. As such, insofar as some people would prefer a Said Achmiz–free _Less Wrong_ experience, one would expect that desire to be met by tools like user-level bans, which have the great boon of impartiality[^impartiality]—not by kicking us off the website we've been using for seventeen years.[^cev] It is my firm belief that it's possible to share a website with people you disagree with.

[^impartiality]: User-level bans or ignore functionality—and indeed, karma voting itself—are impartial in the sense that everyone has the same tools: if Alice doesn't like Bob, she can downvote and ignore his comments or ban him from commenting on her own posts, and _vice versa_. The impartial tools help people share the website without the moderation team needing to take sides.

[^cev]: It's notable that [Yudkowsky's articulation of "Coherent Extrapolated Volition"](https://intelligence.org/files/CEV.pdf) includes the clause "where our wishes cohere rather than interfere", such that "[a] minor, muddled preference of 60% of humanity might be countered by a strong, unmuddled preference of 10% of humanity." Analogously, a majority of rationalists mildly disliking having to share the website with us shouldn't outweigh our strong desire to share it.

The moderation team also used to believe in sharing the website, [in the form of an](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5Ym7DN6h877eyaCnT/meta-tations-on-moderation-towards-public-archipelago) ["archipelago" model](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/97LgacucCxmyjYiNT/the-archipelago-model-of-community-standards). It would appear that that era is over.[^shake-hands] In his self-report, Habryka claims to ["care about archipelagos" and that he thinks it's "hard and bad to try to have centralized control about culture"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=Y6r5RhqmkdosGfrcB), but when I look at his behavior—his comments (four days later, in the same thread!) about the need for ["culture to be driven by someone with taste, who trusts their own judgements on matters of culture"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=wJwKxLAZ8PQcjMcvn), his site-wide ban of Achmiz despite the existence of user-level ban functionality as a sufficient and less intrusive remedy,[^user-ban-section] the way he [casually threatened banning a user for disagreeing with him](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=NgrqS7KjmmaeGar6b)—I find the disavowal of centralized control-seeking hard to credit.

[^shake-hands]: In the comments on the ban announcement, Vaniver writes [that the correct response to differences between cultures of aspiring rationalists is](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=ukjiydLCfzjxxFLWE):

    > for us to shake hands and have different websites with different target audiences (who are drawn to different targets). Otherwise we'll just be locked in conflict forever (as happens when two control systems are trying to set the same variable to different reference values) and this doesn't seem like a productive conflict to me.

    Does Vaniver assume that people on one side of the conflict aren't even interested in _reading_ anything by people on the other side? (One would have imagined that [the eleventh virtue of scholarship](https://www.readthesequences.com/The-Twelve-Virtues-Of-Rationality) would recommend being well-read.) Why not just share the website, since we're not going to run out of paper?    

[^user-ban-section]: See the subsequent section, "User-Level Bans Are a Sufficient and Less Intrusive Remedy".

One could argue that it's ungrateful nonsense to complain about influence someone obtains via administering a website that they created. The LessWrong 2.0 team led by Habryka built and maintained the current version of the website (albeit seeded with the database of posts and comments from its predecessor), and it was a lot of hard work at great personal expense: of course they're going to run it as they see fit. This "our website, our rules" view may have merit, but it's important to notice that it's a _different_ view than the "inherited [...] a really important cultural institution" view. This section is only arguing that the Achmiz ban is unjustified with respect to the cultural institution view, which may not hold—but if it doesn't, it would be dishonest to [motte-and-bailey](https://slatestarcodex.com/2014/11/03/all-in-all-another-brick-in-the-motte/) between the two views, claiming when convenient that LessWrong 2.0 is the fulfillment of Salamon's call for a single locus of discussion for the rationalist community, but insisting when challenged that it's just Habryka's personally curated forum, one of many in the diaspora.[^steering-contradiction]

[^steering-contradiction]: On the same day in July 2025, Habryka wrote both that ["LessWrong has a culture, a lot of which is determined by what things people are rude and offensive towards" and that "[o]ne of [his] jobs as a moderator is to steer where that goes"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=skHeDP97vJ8RkNbE2), and also that he has ["mostly procedural models about how LessWrong should function, including the importance of LW as a free marketplace of ideas[.]"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=DcqqZJHaibzsnkhkd) I think it's pretty weird to write both of those things on the same day.

In an [insightful post about the perils of delegation](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/rSCxviHtiWrG5pudv/do-not-hand-off-what-you-cannot-pick-up), Habryka warns that when you delegate work to someone, that puts them in "a position of leverage over you and the rest of the organization." In retrospect, this would appear to be the devil's bargain the community made when [it voted to hand the _lesswrong.com_ domain name to the LessWrong 2.0 reboot](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Nws6ivJigxLm3gGEY/leaving-beta-voting-on-moving-to-lesswrong-com). We got a shiny new website as a single locus of discussion—at the cost of the website maintainers usurping cultural authority [on the basis of database creds rather than persuasive writing](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=oP6SFheYka5jnabNz). Was the trade worth it, or would it have better to accept the diaspora as a _fait accompli_ and convert _lesswrong.com_ into a static archive? Given that I'm still here, I can't say with a straight face that it would have been better for LessWrong 2.0 never to have existed. What I can say is that [policy debates should not appear one-sided](https://www.readthesequences.com/Policy-Debates-Should-Not-Appear-One-Sided).


## III. The Case for the Ban Rests on Misrepresentations

### Misrepresentations in Habryka's Analysis of Achmiz's Comments

Habryka helpfully presents "a breakdown of the core dynamics that make comment threads with Said rarely worth it" with examples.

As an example of a comment that "read[s] like an implicit claim that you have violated some social norm [...] for which you deserve to be punished (though this will not be said explicitly), or if not that, make you look negligent by not answering an innocuous open-seeming question", Habryka presents [a 2018 comment by Achmiz on Benjamin Hoffman's "Zetetic Explanation"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/i2Dnu9n7T3ZCcQPxm/zetetic-explanation?commentId=NzCRof9btBFkc6PhS). In the comment, Achmiz juxtaposes quotes of Hoffman criticizing conventional pedagogy as both lacking "connection to the ordinary means by which [students] navigate their lives" and failing to resemble "the sorts of skills used in time-travel or Robinson Crusoe stories". Achmiz then comments, "Hm."

It's expressed rather elliptically, but what Achmiz is doing with this comment (as [he clarified in followup discussion](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/i2Dnu9n7T3ZCcQPxm/zetetic-explanation?commentId=s6JBxwJu3hePu8ydB)) is implying that Hoffman is in error to present portrayals of skill in fantasy fiction as representative of good holistic pedagogy of real-world skills. Whether you agree or disagree, this is clearly an on-topic, intellectually substantive contribution.[^juxtaposition] The only way I can read it as "an implicit claim that [Hoffman] violated some social norm" "for which he deserves to be punished" is if there's a social norm against making posts that can be criticized, for which the punishment is criticism—but that would be absurd and contrary to the nature of a discussion forum. [Arguing is not a punishment!](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/n4ukoQzkgbAqpzqb5/argue-politics-with-your-best-friends)

[^juxtaposition]: The rhetorical device of juxtaposing seemingly contradictory passages from an author with minimal additional commentary as a prompt for the author to clarify, is not a unique innovation of Achmiz's. In a June 2023 email discussion, I received an email from Hoffman himself that quoted two parts of my previous message, with the comment, "?????". The meaning was quite clear. I did not take offense or interpret Hoffman as claiming that I deserved to be punished. I just said, "Thanks for pointing out the tension between those two passages," and explained what I meant.

Habryka [cites another response from Achmiz to Hoffman](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/i2Dnu9n7T3ZCcQPxm/zetetic-explanation?commentId=9NReWbLRe5Xv4SKid) as an instance of Achmiz "dismiss[ing] your response as being totally insufficient, confused, or proving the very point he was trying to make". This is a fair description—but Habryka doesn't address whether the dismissal is justified! Is it not conceivable that someone might write a response that's insufficient, confused, or proving the very point the critic was trying to make?

In the comment in question, Achmiz is disputing Hoffman's claim that the explanation of yeast in the post was adequate for being ["competent to interact with the thing, and with its precursors, or at least have an idea of how you'd learn to do so."](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/i2Dnu9n7T3ZCcQPxm/zetetic-explanation?commentId=g8BegiT6TDF3DzrWn)[^baking] When [Hoffman claimed the post empowers the reader to make hard cider from apples](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/i2Dnu9n7T3ZCcQPxm/zetetic-explanation?commentId=k67htq5c4fQAC9C54), Achmiz [disputed this by pointing to cider-making instructions that claim that naïve methods produce poor results](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/i2Dnu9n7T3ZCcQPxm/zetetic-explanation?commentId=qw6DzYx57484YiAtr), which Haybrka cites as Achmiz "continu[ing] to make insinuations that your failure to respond properly validates whatever judgment he is invoking"—again without addressing the merits of Achmiz's claim.

[^baking]: As an [accomplished baker](https://www.datasecretslox.com/index.php/topic,7398.msg290680.html#msg290680), Achmiz is in a credible position to tell.

But the merits matter! If someone believes that Achmiz is applying the wrong standard when he expects that an explanation of yeast adequate to make one competent at interacting with it should allow one to make good bread or cider, that could at least be argued, but Habryka shows no interest in arguing it. He concludes his summary of alleged commenting dynamics by noting that when other commenters ask by what standard Achmiz is invoking a negative judgement, Achmiz explains that he's talking on the object-level and not trying to assign someone low status.

But the comments about the pedagogy of yeast are in fact on the object level about the pedagogy of yeast. One could perhaps infer that when Achmiz doesn't find an interlocutor's replies to be satisfactory, Achmiz is privately making a negative character judgement about the interlocutor as a person, even if Achmiz didn't say that. Such an inference might well be correct, but it's hard to see why it's a moderation issue. On a discussion forum that attempts to grapple with difficult topics at the frontiers of human knowledge, it should not be unusual for commenters to disagree with an author in a multi-comment exchange and not be convinced by the author's replies. ([Bayesian reasoners would never disagree to disagree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aumann%27s_agreement_theorem), but humans are known to be far from the theoretical ideal.) Part of disagreeing is not finding the other's replies adequate. (If you did find them adequate, that would resolve the disagreement.) Punishing Achmiz and only Achmiz for frequently finding authors' replies insufficient (because people suspect, rightly or wrongly, that Achmiz is privately judging them) would be incoherent, and being coherent about it would amount to plunging full speed into the LinkedIn attractor. Avoiding the possibility that strangers on the internet might be judging you is simply not a realistic goal for a public discussion forum.

Habryka also claims (in the previous section) that as far as he can tell, Achmiz "refuse[d] to do much cognitive labor in the rest of the thread" on "Zetetic Explanation", but this is at odds with [Habryka's own comment in that thread](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/i2Dnu9n7T3ZCcQPxm/zetetic-explanation?commentId=jTNQ2KxDH8eAa7s2F) praising a 750-word comment from Achmiz as "a great comment" and saying that Habryka "would maybe like to see this broken out into its own post." Presumably one could not write such a comment while "refus[ing] to do much cognitive labor"! The discrepancy is again glaring.


### Misrepresentations in Habryka's Claims of Alleged Author Complaints About Achmiz

Footnote 1 of the ban announcement claims that "many top authors cit[e] [Achmiz] as a top reason for why they do not want to post on the site, or comment here." This is a surprising claim.[^surprising-claim] Is it true? In some sense, it depends on what's meant by "many" and "top", but we can investigate what is known about author sentiments towards Achmiz without immediately pinning down an operationalization.

[^surprising-claim]: "Top authors" receive lots of comments by virtue of being "top", and not all comments are good; it would be strange if one commenter merely asking pointed questions—not being abusive or overtly insulting—was somehow so offensive that "many top authors" found him in particular a "top reason" to not use the site at all, particularly given the existence of the user-level ban functionality.

We do have some direct testimony from some authors. Most prominently, Duncan Sabien (14K+ karma, 16 Curated posts) [reported in 2023 that he withheld an post](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9DhneE5BRGaCS2Cja/moderation-notes-re-recent-said-duncan-threads?commentId=p8kGBwHpegptXuFAq) from _Less Wrong_ because of Achmiz, and has written a [post denouncing Achmiz's[^socrates] commenting style as amounting to "the willful destruction of gardens of collaborative inquiry."](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/JcgtKunqmELefxksx/killing-socrates) Trinley Goldenberg (5.7K karma, 2 Curated posts) [reported](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=kpH2CMpAshR6tSQph) "a strong sense of sneer on mine and others posts that I find unpleasant" and thanked the moderators for the ban. DirectedEvolution (12.5K karma, 144 total posts, zero Curated) [wrote in 2023 that](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/JcgtKunqmELefxksx/killing-socrates?commentId=tGj3q5t3mMLhSBYde) Achmiz is "one of three people who are readily top of mind at having a net negative impact on my LW experience"—but, notably, that "personally I do not favor banning people sitewide for making me feel uncomfortable." Lucas Gloor (4K karma, 5 total posts, zero Curated) [wrote in 2023](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9DhneE5BRGaCS2Cja/moderation-notes-re-recent-said-duncan-threads?commentId=8m3rpzW59SqQiTdvb) that Achmiz's questions are "one of the most off-putting things [he] associate[s] with LW"—but, notably, that the user-level ban functionality "seems like a good solution to [him]", and in 2024 added that in the subsequent year he had liked several of Achmiz's comments and didn't remember any that bothered him.

[^socrates]: Not by name, but the discussion in the comments section makes the inspiration quite clear.

Beyond direct testimony from authors, we have reports from the mod team about private complaints—but, troublingly, a I explain below, [previous investigation](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=b8cCyG5CGQtRFDdFs) has shown such reports to be false in their claims about the opinions of at least two authors, which casts some doubt on their overall veracity.

In a June 2025 moderation discussion, Achmiz [expressed doubt that](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=7cd3WdqdBGqRkH3ME) authors "capable of making useful contributions to the site" would be discouraged from using the site by the presence of a commenter deemed "'unpleasant'" despite not posting "vulgarity, or personal insults, or anything bad or crazy like that." Achmiz asked for examples of such discouraged authors.

[Habryka gave a list of allegedly discouraged authors](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=kL8pqSsd5cogjpTBA) (bolding added):

> My guess is something like more than half of the authors to this site who have posted more than 10 posts that you commented on, about you, in particular. Eliezer, **Scott Alexander**, **Jacob Falkovich**, Elizabeth Van Nostrand, me, dozens of others.

I reached out to Scott Alexander via Discord in July 2025 to ask if he had "any specific feelings about Said Achmiz and whether he should be allowed to post on _Less Wrong_." Alexander issued this statement:

> I have no direct opinion on him. I have heard his name as someone who's very confrontational, and I agree that this can make a website less pleasant, but I can't remember having any personal experience.

In response to being presented with Alexander's statement contradicting his claim about Alexander's opinion, Habryka [replied](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=DA5S7D3DgFcGChD35):

> I talked with Scott about LW moderation a long time ago (my guess is around 2019) and Said's name came up then. My guess is he doesn't remember. It wasn't an incredibly intense mention, but we were talking about what makes LW comment sections good or bad, and he was a commenter we discussed in that conversation in 2019 or so.

This is a puzzling response. Habryka had cited Alexander as an example of an author discouraged from using the site  whose discouragement is "about [Achmiz], in particular." This is contradicted by Alexander's statement that he has "no direct opinion on [Achmiz]". Rather than retracting the claim, Habryka asserts, "My guess is [Alexander] doesn't remember."

Is the idea supposed to be that Alexander was discouraged from using the site because of Achmiz in particular "around 2019"—albeit not in a way that would elicit "an incredibly intense mention"—but then forgot about it so thoroughly that in 2025, he "[couldn't] remember having any personal experience" on Achmiz? Even if we attribute such poor memory to Alexander, the only evidence we have [locating that hypothesis](https://www.readthesequences.com/Einsteins-Arrogance) is Habryka's word against Alexander's.

But if it's plausible that Alexander doesn't remember what he believed seven years ago, is it not also plausible that _Habryka_ doesn't remember what Alexander said? It's conspicuous that Habryka's elaboration does not claim that Alexander volunteered Achmiz's name, only that the "name came up" and that Achmiz "was a commenter we discussed." Given that neither party can recall the details of a conversation that might have happened in 2019 or possibly some other year, which participant is more likely to have first brought up Achmiz: the one who now has "no direct opinion" on Achmiz, or the one who writes [1800-word comments about how he "do[es] just think [it's] false" that Achmiz "does not carry emnity in his heart"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=uyobAZy5iYAAWzSSi)?

Separately, the inclusion of Jacob Falkovich in the list of authors allegedly discouraged by Achmiz is contradicted by [an October 2018 comment by Falkovich](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/tW6nXrxsAKQmGSGgP/on-insecurity-as-a-friend?commentId=oj2iGrzLg7hTesBQn) (bolding added):

> Said, I hope take comment below as positive, because that is how I mean it. I am trying to honestly communicate my own experience, not pass judgment. This is 100% sincere and unironic.
>
> Said, I have seen a lot of your comments on LW, on my posts and the posts of others. They are, by my standards, high on criticism and low on niceness. I personally formed an impression of you as _disagreeable_. Even though I have argued myself that LW should optimize for honesty over niceness, still the impression of you _disagreeableness_ was colored negatively in my mind.
>
> But now that you've stated that you're disagreeable on purpose, **the negative [a]ffect flipped entirely to become positive**. Instead of you being disagreeable by accident, it's intentional. **I like diversity, and I support people who are on a mission to bring a new flavor to the community**. Knowing this also makes it easier to take criticism from you—it's not that you hate me or what I write, it's just that you don't care if someone thinks you hate them and their writing. The Bayesian update in the two cases is very different!
>
> This isn't to say that Kaj is wrong in being more cautious, or that you are wrong in not being cautious. **Do your own thing**, and own it.

In response to being presented with Falkovich's comment contradicting his claim about Falkovich's opinion, Habryka [replied](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=DA5S7D3DgFcGChD35):

> I think you can clearly see how the Jacob Falkovich one is complicated. He basically says "I used to be frustrated by you, but this thing made that a lot better". I don't remember the exact time I talked to Jacob about it, but it had come up sometime some context where we discussed LW comment sections. It's plausible to me it was before he made this comment, though it would be a bit surprising to me, since that's pretty early into LW's history.[^history]

[^history]: Presumably Habryka meant the history of the LessWrong 2.0 reboot. _Less Wrong_ launched in February 2009.

In fact, I do not see how the Jacob Falkovich one is "clearly" complicated. Indeed, I strongly dispute Habryka's characterization of what Falkovich "basically says": it is tendentious to paraphrase "negative [...] flipped entirely to become positive" as "made that a lot better." The latter is compatible with Habryka's original claim that Falkovich is discouraged from using the website by Achmiz, but the former directly contradicts it: if something that's bothering you is "made [...] a lot better", the implication is that it's still bothering you a little bit (although not as much as before); if your attitude towards something "become[s] positive", that implies that it's not bothering you.

The significance of Alexander and Falkovich turning out (in their own accounts) not to have been discouraged by Achmiz extends beyond removing them from our list of discouraged authors. It also calls into question the veracity of Habryka's reports of discouraged authors: if two of the names Habryka gave as examples turned out to be non-examples when checked, that suggests that Habryka's reports do not reliably distinguish examples from non-examples and therefore that his claim that there exist unnamed "dozens of others" cannot be taken as reliable.

This is not necessarily to accuse Habryka of dishonesty. When someone makes false claims, we need not posit conscious deceit as the explanation when ignorance, poor memory, or weak reading comprehension explains the data equally well. But the claims are still false.

Overall, while it's clear that some users have some negative sentiment about Achmiz (as we can see from the testimony from Sabien, Goldenberg, DirectedEvolution, and Gloor quoted above, and the 8 user-level bans in place), the support for the more specific and much stronger claim that "many top authors cit[e] [Achmiz] as a top reason for why they do not want to post on the site, or comment here" seems questionable: the only unambiguous example I'm aware of is Sabien.

Habryka [claims that](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=Cz8nB3kJwdmqacwDf) "_no_ author complaints were load-bearing for this banning decision" and that he "would make the same decision even if no prominent authors had complained" because he "had much more than enough direct engagement with Said, and seen many more than enough comments of [Achmiz's] on [his] own to understand the consequences of [Achmiz's] commenting style first-hand." That's why the announcement doesn't emphasize author complaints and "instead give[s] detailed models for 10,000+ words[.]"

This position has strange tensions which highlight the dangers of declaring part of a post to be exempt from fruitful criticism on the grounds of being allegedly "non-load-bearing." Models—especially "detailed models"—are [supposed to make predictions](https://www.readthesequences.com/Making-Beliefs-Pay-Rent-In-Anticipated-Experiences)! If your model says that the consequences of Achmiz's commenting style are site-threateningly bad, one would naïvely expect that model to predict that prominent authors would complain—such that if authors hadn't complained, or if reports of author complaints turned out to be bogus, that would be [probabilistic](https://www.readthesequences.com/Update-Yourself-Incrementally) evidence against the model. If evidence from user complaints is excluded, it's hard to see what consequences of Achmiz's comments Habryka could have observed "first-hand", other than his own personal feelings towards Achmiz.


### Misrepresentations in Habryka's Characterization of Achmiz on Obligations to Reply

Habryka claims that "Said himself does not think [ignoring his comments is] a valid option", [citing a 2020 comment by Achmiz on obligations to reply to comments asking for definitions or examples](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/pC74aJyCRgns6atzu/meta-discussion-from-circling-as-cousin-to-rationality?commentId=umfT3A2Xc5C7uzjdQ), but it's not clear what this adds to the case against users simply banning Achmiz from their own posts: it's weird to cite Achmiz's stance on obligations to reply to support the claim that ignoring him is not an option given that _you don't agree with him about obligations to reply_. 

Moreover, quoting the 2020 comment out of context conveys a mistaken impression of Achmiz's views, which Achmiz [clarified in a subsequent comment the same day](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/pC74aJyCRgns6atzu/meta-discussion-from-circling-as-cousin-to-rationality?commentId=kS4BfYJuZ8ZcwuwfB).[^footnote-link] In [the clarifying comment from the 2020 thread](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/pC74aJyCRgns6atzu/meta-discussion-from-circling-as-cousin-to-rationality?commentId=kS4BfYJuZ8ZcwuwfB), Achmiz states, "I'm not saying that there's a specific obligation for a post author to post a reply comment, using the Less Wrong forum software, directly to any given comment." Rather, Achmiz explains, the need for a clarifying question to be answered could be met in any number of other ways, such as being addressed in future work by the author, or by someone else other than the author answering the question or linking to an answer elsewhere. The point is not to impose a legalistic burden on the author, but for the question to actually get answered. The "obligation" to reply is meant in the same sense that one has an "obligation" to provide evidence, cite sources, or correct factual errors: it derives its normative force from its truth-tracking function, not mere social convention.[^obligation]

[^footnote-link]: Habryka links to the clarifying comment [in footnote 11](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation#fnkljn7wnj2ki) as "further details on what Said means by 'responding'", but I don't think this suffices to not mislead readers about Achmiz's true views.

[^obligation]: In personal correspondence with the present author, Achmiz re-stated his position again:

    > To put it concisely: one has an obligation to reply to questions/criticisms/etc. in the same way, and to the same extent, as one has an obligation to do any of the other things that we consider to characterize good writing, good thinking, and good communication. If you write a post on LessWrong, you have an obligation to reply to criticism and questions ... and an obligation not to mischaracterize your opponents' views, and an obligation not to lie about the facts, and obligation to acknowledge evidence against your position, and an obligation to avoid blatantly misleading claims or descriptions ... and so on in this vein. And if you fail to do any of these things, especially if this failure is habitual and/or persistent in the face of un-rebutted criticism, then readers of your writings will judge you negatively for it, and rightly so.

The normativity of truth-tracking is likewise key to understanding the motivation for the 2020 comment's controversial claim that an author who ignores simple requests for clarification "_should_ be interpreted as ignorant." To be sure, there are any number of reasons why an author might not engage with a question other than being unable to answer it (maybe it wasn't worth their time, maybe they missed the notification, maybe they died, _&c._), but the relative likelihood of the "can't answer" and "could answer if they wanted to" hypotheses as an explanation for the observed non-response represents predictions about the real world and [can't be changed on a whim](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/XhaKvQyHzeXdNnFKy/probability-is-subjectively-objective). A norm that forbid commenters from interpreting [the absence of an answer as probabilistic evidence of inability to answer](https://www.readthesequences.com/Absence-Of-Evidence-Is-Evidence-Of-Absence) would be requiring them to _believe something false_.[^believe-something-false]

[^believe-something-false]: More precisely, to assign probability distributions with a worse [proper score](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scoring_rule).

The enduring misunderstanding of Achmiz's position may owe in part to Achmiz's 2020 comments taking it as an implied premise that the question that demands an answer is a good or legitimate one. In a 2023 moderation discussion, Achmiz [clarified that he doesn't believe all comments must be answered regardless of merit](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9DhneE5BRGaCS2Cja/moderation-notes-re-recent-said-duncan-threads?commentId=WA8is3tbyPkHtTEFX):

> I think that people should feel comfortable ignoring and/or downvoting _anyone's_ comments if they don't think engagement will be productive! Certainly I should not be any sort of exception to this. (Why in the world would I be? Of course you should engage only if you have some expectation that engaging will be productive, and not otherwise!)
>
> If I write a comment and you think it is a _bad_ comment (useless, obviously wrong, etc.), by all means downvote and ignore. Why not? And if I write _another_ comment that says "you have an _obligation_ to reply!"—I wouldn't say that, because I don't think that, but let's say that I did—downvote and ignore that comment, too! Do this no matter who the commenter is!

The reason this 2023 comment is compatible with the controversial 2020 remarks is because Achmiz believes that (what he considers) simple requests for definitions and examples _are_ productive, even if not all comments are productive. According to this view, a request for examples of a phenomenon should not be hard to satisfy if the phenomenon is real; a request for a definition of an niche term should not be hard to satisfy if term means anything. Ideally, the answers should have already been in the post; the fact that commenters have to ask is a manifestation of the post not being complete.

Elsewhere, Achmiz [wrote in 2023 that](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FrR78Wy6s79keSuDe/actually-personal-attacks-after-object-level-arguments-is-a?commentId=QDaY64Su9jh2yLjau) "it's not necessarily (and, indeed, not likely to be) worth your time to engage with _all_ of your critics", and in June 2025, [proposed](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines?commentId=7jhPH5GBvkgG6zpq7) "ignore" functionality (which already exists on the third-party [GreaterWrong reader](https://www.greaterwrong.com/)) as an alternative to user bans.[^ignore]

[^ignore]: The distinction being that auto-collapsing comments from an ignored user doesn't prevent other users reading the comments. Discord's block functionality in shared channels works similarly.

It is troubling that the announcement that Achmiz is being banned in part for his views on discourse norms mischaracterizes those views, despite clarifications in the weeks leading up to the ban: Achmiz [explained his position to Habryka in June 2025](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/y7AcBDWsBsbojQufK/said-achmiz-s-shortform?commentId=vF6GckcYf9FTc6MKA) (linking to the clarifying followup comment in the 2020 thread), and I highlighted the 2023 "by all means downvote and ignore" comment in a July 2025 message to _Less Wrong_ moderator Ben Pace.

## IV. The Ban Was Unnecessary

### User-Level Bans Are a Sufficient and Less Intrusive Remedy

Attempting to forestall the objection that people who don't like Achmiz's comments could simply ignore them, Habryka claims that ignoring Achmiz's comments is "not usually a socially viable option." However, since 2018, [existing site functionality already permits](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/adk5xv5Q4hjvpEhhh/meta-new-moderation-tools-and-moderation-guidelines) users [with 50 karma](https://github.com/ForumMagnum/ForumMagnum/blob/ffafa50f85844f2/packages/lesswrong/server/callbacks/votingCallbacks.ts#L21) to ban commenters from their own [Personal Blog](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5conQhfa4rgb4SaWx/site-guide-personal-blogposts-vs-frontpage-posts) posts, and users with 2000 karma to ban users from their own Frontpage posts. If, _arguendo_, a minority of authors have a legitimate interest in preventing Achmiz from commenting on their own posts, then those authors[^modulo-karma] could already get what they want using existing site functionality, and indeed, were already doing so: [we're told that 8 users](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=wZDdMdnDunhKispf7) had banned Achmiz from their posts. Why doesn't that solve the problem without the need for a site-wide ban?

[^modulo-karma]: _Modulo_ the karma limits, but the behavior of the mod team since the feature was introduced seems to imply much more concern about the harm done by unwanted comments than by frivolous bans: I'm not aware of anyone punished or warned for banning too many users. This suggests that the karma limits could be dropped or revised without issue.

The ban announcement claims that the moderators have told Achmiz "to please let authors moderate as they desire", but this is a curious usage of the word _let_, relative to how people think about blocking or banning functionality on other websites. Blocks work by the software preventing the blocked user from sending messages. The consent of the blocked user is neither required nor relevant nor expected.[^consent]

[^consent]: The point of a unilateral block feature is precisely that you shouldn't need someone's consent to get them to stop talking to you.

The complaint about not "let[ting] authors moderate" seems to _not_ be about attempts to evade the ban (_e.g._, by creating sockpuppet accounts), which have not occurred, but simply that Achmiz's comments elsewhere on the website (_e.g._, on his own shortform) may make users feel less comfortable banning him from their posts. Whether this constitutes not "let[ting] authors moderate" can't be assessed based on authors' feelings alone; the nature of the comments matters.

The offending comments seem to be that Achmiz has argued in moderation threads [that the existence of the user-ban functionality enables authors to abuse moderation tools to suppress their critics](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/kyDsgQGHoLkXz6vKL/lw-team-is-adjusting-moderation-policy?commentId=mhTXYL5mjdvpmKxJv), noted on his own shortform [that he couldn't add further replies to a discussion that he had already participated in before being banned](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/y7AcBDWsBsbojQufK/said-achmiz-s-shortform?commentId=PS2qfuSz3BcqSDqhw), published on his own shortform [a comment that had failed to post because he didn't realize he had been banned](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/y7AcBDWsBsbojQufK/said-achmiz-s-shortform?commentId=CBnL4ZhxHpmso4yRi), responded on his own shortform [to a comment _about him_](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/y7AcBDWsBsbojQufK/said-achmiz-s-shortform?commentId=drtrD2ALnSvvWnXB8), and responded on his own shortform [to a comment stating that the author "was honestly curious what you [Achmiz] could mean here"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/y7AcBDWsBsbojQufK/said-achmiz-s-shortform?commentId=oJMqAc3iq2Af9uGp7).

These are all reasonable comments. It makes sense for users of a website to have opinions about the features that the website supports—and the complaint that the ban feature enables suppression of criticism is just straightforwardly true (even if one might think that [it has benefits that outweigh that cost](https://www.readthesequences.com/Policy-Debates-Should-Not-Appear-One-Sided)). It makes sense to want to state for the record that one is no longer able to reply to a discussion that one had been participating in, lest someone infer the weakness of one's position from one's non-response. (Indeed, as we've seen, Habryka shares this concern deeply.) Having gone to the trouble of writing a comment and finding that it couldn't be posted, it makes sense to want to post it somewhere, for the effort to have not been a complete waste. If other people are _talking about you and your positions_ in a venue where you can't make corrections (as contrasted to them silently ignoring your existence), it makes sense to want to post the corrections somewhere else.

If Achmiz were using his shortform to harass authors simply for not wanting to talk to him, that would be a matter for moderator concern, but as I've just detailed, the record doesn't support that: every instance I can find of Achmiz supposedly not "let[tting] authors moderate as they desire" is a situation where a reasonable person would have an interest in speaking up. In the case where Achmiz scrutinized another user's ban history, [it was contextually relevant to the discussion of how the ban functionality is used in practice](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/kyDsgQGHoLkXz6vKL/lw-team-is-adjusting-moderation-policy?commentId=tfyzoaDwti7GrSEKR); when instructed by a moderator to stop, Achmiz [complied](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/kyDsgQGHoLkXz6vKL/lw-team-is-adjusting-moderation-policy?commentId=jzHxiHGvmw23ckJiF).

The user ban functionality works to prevent authors from receiving unwanted comments on their own posts. It's not desirable to prevent banned users from writing on their own shortforms about things that a reasonable person would have an interest in writing about. No further moderator action was warranted.


### Effort Ratios Are Logically Irrelevant

In a subsection on "Asymmetric Effort Ratios and Isolated Demands for Rigor", Habryka points out that critics often have an easier job than the authors they critique: asking a question is usually easier than answering it. This is true, because [verification is often easier than generation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NP_(complexity)). Anyone trying to make sense of others' writing is going to end up asking questions that are easier to ask than answer. The relevance is not obvious, however. What is the problem here supposed to be, exactly?

Habryka acknowledges that there's no problem "in an environment with lots of mutual trust and trade", but contends that "in an adversarial context it means that it's easily possible to run a DDOS attack on basically any author whose contributions you do not like by just asking lots of questions, insinuating holes or potential missing considerations and demanding a response approximately independently of the quality of their writing."

It would seem that some dubious implicit assumptions are being made about participants' motives. The DDoS attack analogy would carry if we construe intellectual discouse as a zero-sum game in which every unanswered criticism results in the critic winning and the author losing the same number of "points".

But that construal fails on two counts. Firstly, it shouldn't be an adversarial situation. An intellectually honest author (who wants the truth to prevail, rather than wanting their own ideas to prevail regardless of whether they're true) should welcome probing questions. If any of the questions reveals a real flaw in the author's thesis, an honest author would count that as a benefit (because they learned something), not a cost. At the same time, dumb questions that aren't worth answering or reading can simply be downvoted. That is, to the extent that the community can distinguish between good and bad criticisms on the merits,[^determined-critics] determined critics of a particular author are just providing free verification labor, not conducting a DDoS attack: as it is [written of the fifth virtue](https://www.readthesequences.com/The-Twelve-Virtues-Of-Rationality), "Do not believe you do others a favor if you accept their arguments; the favor is to you." (And to the extent that the community can't distinguish between good and bad criticisms on the merits, we have bigger problems.)

[^determined-critics]: And to the extent that readers are [taking into account the selection effect](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/DoPo4PDjgSySquHX8/heads-i-win-tails-never-heard-of-her-or-selective-reporting) of who the determined critics target.

Secondly, even if we [suppose that authors are not intellectually honest](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/e4GBj6jxRZcsHFSvP/assume-bad-faith) and just want their own ideas to win, no one should be thinking that an unanswered criticism represents a zero-sum transfer of status from author to critic. Insofar as we model people's discursive behavior as being governed by implied status rewards, clearly the reward for asking a probing question should be less than the reward for answering it (because the answer is more expensive and therefore requires a larger reward to elicit it). Moreover, people are pretty smart about status games and can figure this out. Probing questions rarely get high karma; thorough answers often do. No one thinks that a famous author must be worse than an unknown one because the former attracts many critics and the latter few or none. The market clears.

And given that the market clears, there's no good reason to censor probing questions: whether the questions get answered or not, discerning users will make up their own minds and vote accordingly. The only reason you would want to censor probing questions is to prevent people from noticing flaws in need of probing.


## V. Further Replies

### Preventing "Relitigation" Is a Pretext for Suppressing Dissent

In the ban announcement, Habryka writes that users who disagree with the moderators can "make a post about how you disagree with some decision we made." He also writes:

> I think I should very rarely prevent whoever is being affected by a moderation decision from defending themselves on LessWrong. For practical reasons, I need to limit the time I personally spend replying and engaging with their defense, but I think it makes sense to allow the opposing side in basically all cases like this to publish a defense on the site, and do at least some to signal-boost it together with any moderation decisions.

This would be great if Habryka were telling the truth that users would in fact be permitted to "make a post about how [they] disagree with some decision [the moderators] made." However, when user Sting made a question post, ["Which top authors did Said Achmiz drive away?"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FLJ9B4pHzjKmPPxd5/which-top-authors-did-said-achmiz-drive-away), Habryka unlisted it (making it only available by direct link) and demoted it to a comment on the ban announcement post, [stating](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FLJ9B4pHzjKmPPxd5/which-top-authors-did-said-achmiz-drive-away?commentId=wpy7ZW4xLjbGJk8CS), "I do really want to avoid this becoming a recurring topic with lots of disconnected top-level posts doing relitigation", and "I think this is the right choice for stuff like this".

When Sting [pointed out that their question met the Personal Blogpost criteria](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FLJ9B4pHzjKmPPxd5/which-top-authors-did-said-achmiz-drive-away?commentId=GNN9cpbHHopNFtZG6), Habryka replied, "To be clear, we relatively routinely merge and move comment threads (as is common practice on most internet forums)." Although it depends on the meaning of "relatively routinely", this claim is questionable: while I'm aware of [two](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/WwTPSkNwC89g3Afnd/comment-section-from-05-19-2019) [cases](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/pC74aJyCRgns6atzu/meta-discussion-from-circling-as-cousin-to-rationality) where a derailed comment thread was split onto its own post, I'm not aware of any other cases where a Personal post from an established user was manually delisted; the question had achieved 48 karma in 19 votes, suggesting that the voting userbase thought it was an appropriate and high-quality post for the site.[^non-slush] In the same comment, Habryka also states that "[t]he visibility of the comments on this post will be very weird and kind of jank, since unlisted posts aren't designed to have active discussion under them", which casts further doubt on the claim that his action was "relatively routine[ ]".[^relatively-routine]

[^non-slush]: Moderators do routinely prevent inappropriate or low-quality posts from being published on the site, as can be seen in the rejected posts slushpile on [the moderation page](https://www.lesswrong.com/moderation), but Sting's question is clearly not in the slushpile reference class.

[^relatively-routine]: One would naïvely expect the codebase to support relatively routine operations in a non-weird, non-jank manner.

[I pointed out that](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FLJ9B4pHzjKmPPxd5/which-top-authors-did-said-achmiz-drive-away?commentId=HqXwb2vWdb4pYiLtZ) when users make posts on topics that have already discussed before, the moderators do not demote subsequent posts to comments.[^forecasting] What made this topic different?

[^forecasting]: For example, no one seemed to have a problem with ["Forecasting is Way Overrated, and We Should Stop Funding It"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/WCutvyr9rr3cpF6hx/forecasting-is-way-overrated-and-we-should-stop-funding-it) prompting the reply posts ["Forecasting is Not Overrated and It's Probably Funded Appropriately"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/P9EdMqTscmcsorret/forecasting-is-not-overrated-and-it-s-probably-funded) and ["Comment on 'Forecasting is Way Overrated, and We Should Stop Funding It'"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/kA2pf6DFqZCxomp7i/comment-on-forecasting-is-way-overrated-and-we-should-stop). 

Habryka [replied, in part](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FLJ9B4pHzjKmPPxd5/which-top-authors-did-said-achmiz-drive-away?commentId=Y3ND7nnxqhBtptPLj):

> The default equilibrium of internet discussion like this is that stuff gets eternally relitigated because people show up who don't want to read the previous context and are looking for some kind of drama, or get drawn in by someone else presenting some isolated facet of the context. The whole reason why I spent 60+ hours writing the previous post is to avoid that exact dynamic. Allowing lots of top-level posts will inevitably then cause me to have to spend another 100+ hours on this, which I do not want to do. Indeed, in this case there are a lot of comments on the banning post that directly address questions in this post, and I strongly expect any discussion situated in that context to go a lot better.

At the time, I [pointed out](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FLJ9B4pHzjKmPPxd5/which-top-authors-did-said-achmiz-drive-away?commentId=6dr8uZfKfEaFtjLdb) that "have to" isn't warranted: other people have an interest in discussing the ban amongst themselves independently of whether Habryka thinks its worth his time to reply (to which Habryka agreed).

Separately from the semantics of "having to" respond, however, it's not clear to me that Habryka understands what a stunning admission the phrase "which I do not want to do" is.

The _personal convenience_ of moderators is not a legitimate reason to limit the visibility of content! This should be quite clear if we consider any other topic. It would be obviously corrupt if the moderators wrote a post announcing that the "one-third" answer to [the Sleeping Beauty problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sleeping_Beauty_problem) is correct and demoted any subsequent posts taking the "one-half" position to comments on the announcement that the answer is one-third.

If the moderators in this hypothetical scenario were to defend their actions on the grounds of their "strongly expect[ing] any discussion situated in that context to go a lot better," one would hope users would ask the obvious question: better for whom? As a matter of human psychology rather than rationality, it makes sense that someone who had sunk 60+ hours arguing that one-third is the correct answer might feel personally annoyed if someone else were allowed to make a top-level post arguing for one-half which emphasized different facets of the context: if readers found the second post persuasive, that might be embarrassing for the author of the first post and even subject them to social incentives to spend even more time replying, which they might not want to do.

But there's little reason to think the first author's personal annoyance has anything to do with what would make the discussion go better _in terms of readers having accurate beliefs about the Sleeping Beauty problem_. For readers who haven't yet made up their mind on whether the answer is one-third or one-half, the obviously fair policy is that both sides should be allowed to post under the same rules, rather than one side's arguments only being allowed in a context chosen by the other. Indeed, if one side insists on asymmetric rules, that's itself suspicious.[^censorship-suspicion]

[^censorship-suspicion]: If one-half is in fact wrong, wouldn't you expect readers to find your post more convincing on the merits? Crushing them with your mod powers only invites doubt that you weren't convincing on the merits.

In the comments on Sting's question, [I asked](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FLJ9B4pHzjKmPPxd5/which-top-authors-did-said-achmiz-drive-away?commentId=6dr8uZfKfEaFtjLdb) if I would be allowed to make a top-level post commenting on the ban decision. In his reply, Habryka [wrote that](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FLJ9B4pHzjKmPPxd5/which-top-authors-did-said-achmiz-drive-away?commentId=QkmqTmfdkhpvcNSKL) it's "quite important to provide context as to the efforts already exerted on the topic and associated lack of response, as the norms by which many, if not most, readers will interpret the lack of a response is as some kind of admission of wrongness", such that it's "bad form to not provide it in the top-level post[.]"

I have no idea what kind of context Habryka is expecting me to provide. He wrote a post justifying his ban decision; I'm writing a post explaining why both the ban and its justification are bad. In doing so, of course I've [linked to the ban announcement](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation) and extensively quoted its language: I had to in order to argue against it!

If it helps, I'm happy to clarify that I don't think readers should think I'm right _because_ Habryka might not reply. (He's been very clear that [he didn't want to spend more than 10 hours of his time](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation#So_with_all_that_Said) responding to comments on the ban, and I'm happy to provide that context.) I think readers should think I'm right _because_ I've successfully argued in the preceding sections that the ban justification is riddled with logical errors and factual misrepresentations. Whether Habryka chooses to reply or not is his prerogative; in either case, readers will judge on the basis of whatever information is available to them. Similarly, that I chose to write this critique was _my_ prerogative. If the things I have to say are personally inconvenient for someone else, that's not my problem.

If it helps, I'm happy to acknowledge that Habryka already spent 60+ hours on the ban announcement, which evokes sympathy for him not wanting to spend any more time on this affair—but I actually think that context that helps my case, not his. If he spent so much time trying to craft a convincing ban announcement, and ended up with such a poor result (such that I _could_ write so many words credibly critiquing it),[^no-filibuster] I think that speaks to the underlying weakness of his case.

[^no-filibuster]: I think some readers may be wary that a long post such as this one represents an effort to "filibuster": that the mod team did something I disliked, so I'm trying to delegitimize them throwing up a impressive-looking flood of verbiage. I'm denying this on the grounds that it wouldn't work: that would be bad writing, and the comment section would notice. The reason this post is long is because the reasoning offered for the ban is so terrible in so many different ways that I actually have this much to say about it.


### Replies to Vaniver

Lightcone Infrastructure board member and _Less Wrong_ BDFL Vaniver [commented on the ban announcement](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=j57cuznkZBXqSn7sr).

#### On the Ideological Turing Test

Vaniver characterizes the dispute over Achmiz as a cultural clash between the values of an older culture of _Less Wrong_ (as represented by Achmiz and the present author) and a newer one (as represented by the mod team). Vaniver concedes that by the standards of the old culture, "pointing out that something is impeding the flow of information is almost enough to end the conversation on its own." He makes an analogy to the development of evidential, causal, and functional decision theories (henceforth EDT, CDT, and FDT, respectively): CDT improves on EDT by ruling out non-causal decision influences that CDT considers illegitimate, while FDT further improves on CDT by ruling in some kinds of non-causal influences as legitimate after all.

Vaniver then claims that the new culture is the more sophisticated one (analogous to FDT), but the justification he offers is fundamentally lacking if not absent. Vaniver writes:

> I operationalize this by something like [Ideological Turing Test]-passing; I think it's generally the case that I can see the thing Said or Zack is pointing out, and in the reverse direction I mostly get the sense that they rarely see the criticism, and if they do, it's only as something that seems fundamentally illegitimate to them.

But that's not what the [Ideological Turing Test](https://www.econlib.org/archives/2011/06/the_ideological.html) (henceforth ITT) [is for](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/jo5Fhkb7escrYE9cC/on-the-contrary-steelmanning-is-normal-itt-passing-is-niche). You can't declare victory in a debate by citing your purportedly superior ITT results: a professor of comparative religion who thinks that all faith traditions are true in their own way would probably do better on an ITT for Islam than most atheists, but this does not imply that atheism is false!

If Vaniver could actually pass old _Less Wrong_'s ITT test and is not just [pretending to be wise](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/jeyvzALDbjdjjv5RW/pretending-to-be-wise), he would understand why his purported ability to paraphrase both sides' arguments is not itself an argument, because [your strength as a rationalist](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5JDkW4MYXit2CquLs/your-strength-as-a-rationalist) lies in your ability to argue for a belief being constrained by whether that belief is actually true. As Eliezer Yudkowsky [wrote in 2008](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/PxN5iwS2CTCYi4oAP/against-devil-s-advocacy) (before the term "Ideological Turing Test" was coined): "I cannot argue effectively for that, because I do not believe it. Or if you prefer, I do not believe it, because I cannot argue effectively for it."

Vaniver cites my ["Critic Contributions are Logically Irrelevant"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/bsKHthyhB7DNBxERQ/critic-contributions-are-logically-irrelevant) as a "particularly crisp" example of the old _Less Wrong_ ethos conflicting with the new. (As many readers inferred at the time, that post was written as a generalized reply to [claims that Achmiz's alleged lack of positive contributions justifies censoring his critical comments](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/JcgtKunqmELefxksx/killing-socrates).) "[P]eople often raise objections about commenters that don't make sense as logical criticisms. But if they aren't _intended_ as logical criticisms, that seems irrelevant to me," Vaniver writes, with a suggestion to reread Yudkowsky's 2007 post ["Feeling Rational"](https://www.readthesequences.com/Feeling-Rational).

I have to question whether Vaniver read past the title of "Critic Contributions Are Logically Irrelevant": I think I adequately handled the case of objections not intended as logical criticisms in the final section, ["A Caveat: Critic Contributions Can Be Relevant If You Don't Care About Maximizing Correctness"](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/bsKHthyhB7DNBxERQ/critic-contributions-are-logically-irrelevant#A_Caveat__Critic_Contributions_Can_Be_Relevant_If_You_Don_t_Care_About_Maximizing_Correctness). The relevance of people having objections about commenters that don't make sense as logical criticisms is that if the objectors have their way, that establishes a precedent of the forum being a place where logical criticism is dimissed in favor of other concerns, which might be desirable for a social or hobby group whose only mission is for its members to have a fun time, but is contrary to the mission of an intellectual forum like _Less Wrong_ purports to be.

Vaniver's suggestion that I reread "Feeling Rational" is a _non sequitur_. In that post, Yudkowsky argues against the popular misconception that rationality demands suppression of emotions; on the contrary, Yudkowsky argues, it's rational to fully feel the emotion that fits the facts. But I don't argue for the suppression of emotions. Rather, I advocate specifically against the [weaponization of emotional harm](http://unremediatedgender.space/2018/Jan/dont-negotiate-with-terrorist-memeplexes/) as a pretext to censor intellectually substantive criticism in a purportedly intellectual venue. If those who find Achmiz's comments hurtful agreed that their pain was not cause for moderator action, there would be no dispute.

#### On "Emotional Tallness"

Vaniver cites [Duncan Sabien's concept of "emotional tallness"](https://homosabiens.substack.com/p/reflections-on-one-1-abuser#:~:text=Emotionally%20Tall), saying that he used to think of his own psychological fortitude as a rationalist virtue, but now considers it an incidental fact about himself: similarly, IQ is relevant to rationality, but isn't a virtue _per se_.

But what counts as a virtue is not relevant in the present context. Let us grant without question that no one is morally responsible for their IQ. Regardless, it would clearly be grossly detrimental to the site's mission to ban high-IQ users (or force them write more like low-IQ users) in order to make low-IQ users more comfortable. Or at least, while it's not literally impossible that some sort of special accomodation for low-IQ users might pass a cost–benefit analysis, a detailed case would have to be made for the surprising claim that such an intervention would benefit the site's mission.

The same goes for "emotional tallness." It's a trait relevant to rationality. (Limits on what kind of information you can process without being psychologically impaired imply limits on your ability to make rational decisions in situations where that information is relevant.) A site dedicated to advancing the art of rationality shouldn't go out of its way to silence people with high values of the trait in order to accomodate people with low values of the trait.

It's not clear why Vaniver (or Sabien) uses a height metaphor instead of a word like [_fortitude_](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fortitude) or [_resilience_](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/resilience)—or if a metaphor for bodily attributes was desired, _strength_ would be the standard one. The strength metaphor would be more fitting insofar as it comports with the reality that it's possible and desirable to increase one's psychological fortitude. It's possible to [want to become stronger](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/DoLQN5ryZ9XkZjq5h/tsuyoku-naritai-i-want-to-become-stronger), and succeed at training it—notably unlike height or IQ, which are largely immutable given current technology. One has to wonder whether the choice of height as the metaphor for mental fortitude is [intentional in some sense](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/sXHQ9R5tahiaXEZhR/algorithmic-intent-a-hansonian-generalized-anti-zombie), meant to protect the self-image of those who don't want to become stronger by making it look like they don't have a choice.[^metaphor-choice]

[^metaphor-choice]: Thanks to Said Achmiz for this observation.

Vaniver concludes by linking to [a 2013 comment thread](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/qrA2e4n6JqqAoBYzE/ritual-report-schelling-day?commentId=S6zEi2yw8HL6WX8g7) in which he criticizes Yudkowsky's advocacy of deleting comments that negatively reinforce contributor efforts. The present-day Vaniver writes that he "was missing the concept of emotional tallness, then" and that he "can see the younger me levelling a similar criticism at the mod team now."

But the mere observation that present-day Vaniver possesses "the concept of emotional tallness" doesn't explain what the younger Vaniver was allegedly wrong about![^indirect-effects] In the 2013 thread, the younger Vaniver [testifies that](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/qrA2e4n6JqqAoBYzE/ritual-report-schelling-day?commentId=geiMZp5ocaxnFoMPE) "responding appropriately to criticism is a skill that takes development" and that he was "pleased with how far [he had] gotten." Adopting the novel metaphor of "emotional tallness" rather than just saying _fortitude_ doesn't refute the younger Vaniver's claim that it's possible and desirable to learn to respond appropriately to criticism. (Alternatively, if the claim is that it was possible for the younger Vaniver to learn because he was "emotionally tall", but that "emotionally short" people can't learn, it remains to be argued for why _Less Wrong_ should accomodate emotionally short people more than it currently accomodates low-IQ people.)

[^indirect-effects]: Vaniver also writes that his younger self was "missing the point about the conversation quality being worse because of indirect effects." This is too vague for me to address without further explanation; I don't know what purported indirect effects Vaniver is referring to.

I, too, have grown and changed a lot in my years of life on Earth, but in the many, many cases where I now disagree with something I used to believe strongly, I expect to be able to explain what arguments and evidence changed my mind in words that my younger self would find at least somewhat compelling. I think that if I couldn't, that would be a troubling warning sign that my current belief was a product of corrupting social pressures rather than wisdom.

In terms of Vaniver's decision theory metaphor, as a convert from CDT to FDT, I expect to be able to give my CDT-adhering ex-comrades a hard time by challenging them to explain why they don't get the big money in Newcomb's problem. If I just said, well, the culture has moved on, people used to believe in CDT, but everyone who's anyone is into FDT now, that would not be compelling.

The fact that Vaniver, while claiming to have transcended the childish concerns of the old culture of _Less Wrong_, shows so little interest in arguing his views to those who do not already share them is not to his credit, nor to the new culture.

## VI. What I Think Is Actually Going On

In the previous sections, I have argued that the ban of Achmiz contradicts the stated values of _Less Wrong_ and that the ban rationale 


### The Passive-Aggressiveness Accusation

A recurring theme in the accusations against Achmiz is that Achmiz is allegedly being deceptive (or potentially even "gaslighting"[^g-word]) by disrespecting other users and then denying that disrespect was intended. Pace, for example, [characterizes Achmiz as](https://www.greaterwrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation/comment/BJ2j8sQThHzDYNFo9) "holding extreme disdain and disrespect for interlocutors while being committed to never saying anything explicitly or even denying that it is the case."

[^g-word]: In the comments, Habryka [writes that](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=uyobAZy5iYAAWzSSi) he "feel[s] some temptation to try to restore some of [his] sanity by providing compelling demonstrations of what has felt like gaslighting to me", although that that wasn't the primary motivation for the ban announcement post.

I can't speak for Said (and he is no longer permitted to speak for himself), but if I may be permitted to speculate, I think what's going on here is that Said is _polite_. He's a polite person! The reason he's "committed to never saying anything explicitly" is because he believes that personal insults would be contrary to the etiquette of a civilized discussion forum.

Rather, what he does do, and what provokes the accusations of dishonesty, is ask pointed questions such that some people will (rightly or wrongly) _infer_ that he's thinking negatively of someone. The complaint seems to be that this is worse, because passive-aggression is [purportedly worse than overt aggression](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/MqgwHJ93pJpaeHXs6/posts-i-don-t-have-time-to-write#1__Blatant_conflicts_are_the_best_kind). Habryka [writes in the comments that](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/98sCTsGJZ77WgQ6nE/banning-said-achmiz-and-broader-thoughts-on-moderation?commentId=uyobAZy5iYAAWzSSi) he "think[s] [he] could handle disdain fine, if it was carried openly, and could be argued with."

### It's Hard to Believe That Open Disdain Would Be Better



### The Real Rule Is to "Play Ball"



## VI. Recommendations to Readers

### LessWrong 2.0 Is a Website, Not a Culture or an Authority

In the ban announcement, Habryka invites users dissatisfied with how the site is being run to loudly quit, but adds that "not all things are so bad as to make it the right choice to stop using LessWrong altogether" and that he doesn't believe that agreeing with the LessWrong 2.0 team "on all fronts" should be "a requirement for thinking LessWrong is good for the world."

I think it's wrong to conflate using a website with thinking that the website is good for the world. Internet discussion platforms pose a coordination problem: the main reason to use a website is because everyone else is already using it. [I use Twitter](https://x.com/zackmdavis) (officially called X since 2023) as a discussion platform and as a marketing channel for [my writing](http://zackmdavis.net/blog/). That doesn't mean I think Twitter is unambiguously "good for the world." On the contrary, I think Twitter has a lot of negative effects on the world (in the form of sapping attention spans, spreading misinformation, increasing political polarization, _&c._). It's just that me unilaterally forgoing Twitter wouldn't make a dent in the harms it does. In the absence of a critical mass coordinating to switch to some superior website, I'm trapped—but because I know that I'm trapped, I can relate to the trap in a sane way.

Namely: Twitter is infrastructure—not a community, and definitely not any kind of intellectual authority. It makes sense to [not directly link to Substack in one's Tweets in order to avoid being algorithmically punished](https://omarshehata.substack.com/p/fighting-twitters-censorship-of-substack), but it should be clear that this is a matter of complying with Elon Musk's whims because he lawfully took over the infrastructure and has the hard power to do what he wants, not because there's actually anything wrong with Substack.

I think students of human rationality should relate to LessWrong 2.0 the same way as they relate to Twitter—as infrastructure—and relate to the moderation team the same way they relate to Elon Musk.[^musk-truthseeking] I think LessWrong 2.0's suppression of intellectually substantive discussion in order to protect contributor feelings is doing harm by deceiving the world about what rationality even is, but it still makes sense to use the website as a discussion platform and as a marketing channel for our writing, because we're trapped. In that sense, I agree with Habryka when he writes that "for the rest of us" "not that much has to change."

[^musk-truthseeking]: Who, notably, also talks a good game about "truth-seeking."

However, unlike the case of Twitter, I worry that too many students of human rationality aren't modeling themselves as trapped and therefore aren't relating to the trap in a sane way. I worry that a lot of people are clinging to an implicit assumption that there is a healthy and trustworthy "rationalist community", such that trying to gain the approval of "the community" and its leaders amounts to the same thing as trying to be rational. [That was never going to be real](https://www.readthesequences.com/No-Safe-Defense-Not-Even-Science).

### Speak the Truth, Even If Your Voice Trembles

To the people who care about whether what they say is true, I advise courage. Speak the truth, even if your voice trembles. If a hotel manager proclaims themselves an expert on human rationality by virtue of being a hotel manager and tries to intimidate you into silence, they're probably bluffing. You don't have to kiss the ring.
